WHAT IS THE ATOMIC BOMB?

Nuclear fission was first discovered in 1938 by German scientists. Nuclear fission did not become a major concern until World War 2, when U.S. scientists urged the United States government to begin research into nuclear fission and nuclear arms development. Nuclear fission was seen as a major concern because of how deadly it could be, it could produce explosions that could wipe out entire countries. Nuclear fission was also seen as a potential source of energy and even to current day is still used as a source of energy in some regions. No matter how deadly the discovery of nuclear fission was, it helped shape the world we live in today and established the United States as a major military power in the post World War 2 age.
Atomic bombs (also known as nuclear bombs) are weapons that use nuclear reactions as their source of explosive power. Atomic bombs work when an atom of radioactive material splits into lighter atoms and there is a sudden powerful release of energy. This concept is called nuclear fission. 

USES DURING WWII
https://nsarchive2.gwu.edu/nukevault/ebb525-The-Atomic-Bomb-and-the-End-of-World-War-II/documents/001a.pdf
In May of 1941, the President of the National Academy of Sciences was sent a report by the "Uranium Committee" headed by Lyman J. Briggs on their discoveries concering the concept of atomic fission. Dr.Briggs and his committee recommended that the government of the United States fund a large scale program in regards to atomic fission because "we must not risk giving an enemy nation the advantage of first putting atomic fission to military use." Dr.Driggs and his committee acknowledged that the soonest a nuclear weapon could be developed was 1943 which would be nuclear missiles. The three proposed uses of atomic fission were violent missiles, violently explosive bombs or as a power source on submarines and ships. However atomic fission was used, Dr.Driggs and his committee expressed heavily that the United States must not allow other major powers to make advances in nuclear technology before they do. 

THE MANHATTAN PROJECT
https://www.atomicheritage.org/history/manhattan-project
http://www.ushistory.org/us/51f.asp
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JSf3GOMziOg
https://cdn.theatlantic.com/assets/media/img/photo/2012/06/the-secret-city/o05_61173130/main_1200.jpg?1420515863 - Secrecy Sign
https://cdn.theatlantic.com/assets/media/img/photo/2012/06/the-secret-city/o01_92549880/main_1200.jpg?1420515861
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tJ3vN22KFYg

The Manhattan Project was a project organized in August of 1942 by the government of the United States. The Manhattan Project had many operating locations, but the town of Oak Ridge, Tennessee (often referred to as the "Secret City") was a main facility of development of the nuclear weapons. The U.S. Government took many measures to make sure that this town was kept completely secret; workers were sworn to secrecy and the entire town and facility were fenced in. Tens of thousands of workers and their families resided in Oak Ridge, and most did not know what they were developing. Workers were told of the specific tasks they needed to complete and only given instructions on how to their respective tasks. More than 600,000 people worked on the Manhattan Project, and only the elite members of the project knew just what they were working on.

DROPPING THE BOMBS
https://nsarchive2.gwu.edu/nukevault/ebb525-The-Atomic-Bomb-and-the-End-of-World-War-II/documents/009.pdf
A document dated to May 2nd 1945 notes the initial meeting of the Target Committee. During this first meeting of the Target Committee, the Target Committee discussed plans to drop an atomic bomb on Japan, but had yet to figure out where the bomb should be placed. Weather was taken heavily into account, and August was seen as a main time period to drop the bomb(s). The Target Committee wanted to wreak havoc on Japan, taking mass urban and industrial centers into account. Hiroshima was taken into heavy consideration as it was the "largest untouched target not on the 21st Bomber Command priority list." The priority list mentioned was of the existing plan to drop 100,000 tons of bombs on Japanese cities through the end of 1945. Through the language of the NSA document from this initial meeting, it can be noted that the United States wanted to leave no mercy on Japan, they wanted to "bomb the hell out of Tokyo" and targeted major urban centers to wreak havoc on. 

In a [Insert document] noting the dropping of Little Boy on Hiroshima, it mentions that Hiroshima was chosen because it was the "one reserved target" where there was no indication of any POW camp. An account from Tinian Airport after the dropping notes that there were:
Two distinct shocks felt in combat airplane similar in intensity of close flak bursts. Entire city except outermost ends of dock areas was covered with a dark grey dust layer which joined the cloud column. It was extremely turbulent with flashes of fire visible in the dust. Estimated diameter of this dust layer is at least three miles. One observer stated it looked as though the whole town was being torn apart with columns of dust rising out of valleys approaching the town. Due to dust visual observation of structural damage could not be made.

The bombs did their job. They tore apart the city of Hiroshima and left nothing standing. It was as explosive and destructive as the Uranium Committee had said it would be. To a psychological level, it had demoralized the Japanese. In a transcript of Japan's Foreign Minister Togo's encounter with the Japanese Emperor, he notes that "His Majesty observed that, now with this kind of weapon in use, it had become even more impossible than ever to continue the war; we should no longer miss an opportunity to end it with an excuse to wait for a favorable term [of the surrender]." The United States had now established themselves as a nuclear power in the world, and shown that they had surpassed other nations in nuclear research and development as well as created the most powerful weapon known to mankind. In a diary entry by Walter Brown, he writes that the President had come into the ward room and "pointed out that it was 20,000 more powerful than TNT." The President was relieved when he received news of the bomb being dropped as there were huge expenditures behind the Manhattan Project, and he feared that it would not have paid off. 


NUCLEAR POWER
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/The%20History%20of%20Nuclear%20Energy_0.pdf
https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.php?id=207&t=3
https://www.world-nuclear.org/information-library/current-and-future-generation/nuclear-power-in-the-world-today.aspx
https://www.world-nuclear.org/information-library/safety-and-security/safety-of-plants/fukushima-accident.aspx - Fukushima Incident
In December of 1942, the first self-sustaining nuclear reaction occurred at the University of Chicago. After realizing the immense amounts of energy and power these reactions gave off, scientists quickly realized that this energy had the possibility of being weaponized. And through that came the Manhattan Project [INSERT LINK TO MANHATTAN PARAGRAPH], and other significant projects leading nuclear arms development in the United States. However, some scientists geared their focus to researching the possible use of atomic fission as a means of producing electricity. In the post-war United States, the major goal of nuclear research was to show that nuclear energy could be used to product energy for commercial use. Shippingport, Pennsylvania housed the first commercial electricity-generating powerplant, and the industry started to rapidly privatize afterwards. Light-water reactors were becoming the norm, they worked by using ordinary water to cool the reactor core during chain reaction, and then converting that steam to electrical energy by spinning a turbine to generate power. Through the rest of thr 60s, power industry grew rapidly in the United States but it was not until the 70s and 80s that questions were raised towards the safety of nuclear power reactors. Issues were raised concerning waste disposal and radiation and growth of nuclear energy in the United States slowed. Concerns with nuclear power plants are: 
- Risk of meltdown
- Risk of miners getting lung cancer due to the large amounts of radon gas in uranium mines
- Radioactive waste from power plants

However, even with these concerns being raised, the usage of nuclear power plants was not stopped. The number of nuclear power plants being made declined, and it was due to these risks as well as nuclear power being much more expensive than other means of generating electricity such as wind and water turbines. According to the [U.S. Energy Information and Administration], there are still 59 commercially operating nuclear power plants in the United States with a total of 97 total nuclear reactors. With 450 total reactors in the world [World Nuclear Association], the United States is still generating 805 terawatt-hours of nuclear generated energy per year. 

https://cdn1.i-scmp.com/sites/default/files/styles/1200x800/public/images/methode/2019/01/22/a1d47038-1e23-11e9-9b66-f8d7b487d426_image_hires_181934.JPG?itok=4yIJqIXB&v=1548152379
The United States' compliance with scientists and researchers observing atomic fission and nuclear energy in the World War II era still has a lasting impact on the United States and the rest of the world to this day. Nuclear power was seen as a good, clean way of generating power for more than 25 years after the war and brought a lot of electrical power to the United States that could not have been done with existing methods. But questions still remain to this day surrounding the remaining use of nuclear power, especially after the Fukushima power plant incident [INSERT ARTICLE]. Should existing nuclear power plants remain running, or should governments cease the use of nuclear power completely? 

NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGY
https://www.world-nuclear.org/information-library/non-power-nuclear-applications/radioisotopes-research/radioisotopes-in-water-resources-the-environment.aspx
Plant mutation breeding - breeders expose seeds to radiation in order to create mutuations that are more desirable than the initial subject. These mutations can leed to breeding with other species to create even more desirable cultivars.

Food Irradiation - the application of ionizing radiation to food. This nuclear technology was designed to improve the safety and extend the shelf life of foods by using radiation to reduce or eliminate bacteria or insects that may be present in the food. Irradiation can prevent ilnesses and also delay sprouting of certain foods. The FDA evaluates the safety of irradiated foods, and approves only certain tested foods for irradiation. More facts and procedures on irradiation can be found here - https://www.fda.gov/food/buy-store-serve-safe-food/food-irradiation-what-you-need-know

Medicine - The most well known use of radiation in the medicinal field is x-rays. X-rays work by producing a stream of radiation that then comes into contact with our body tissues and produce an imagine onto metal film. Denser materials in our body absorb the radiation, which is why we can see our bones in x-rays. Radioactive material and radiation is commonly used as a form of therapy, more specifically, to treat cancer. Similar to the goals of food irradiation, radiation therapy works by using radiation waves to destroy or damage cancer cells. - https://www.radiationanswers.org/radiation-sources-uses/medical-uses.html

Inspection - Radioisotopes are also commonly used as a form of inspection or gaining more information about a material. For example, naturally occuring radioisotopes are commonly used to determine the age of rocks and other materials. Radioisotopes are also commonly used to determine whether water is safe for consumption or not, as there can be naturally or artificially identified isotopes within a source of water. They can also give more information such as rainfall conditions, pollution processes, and evaporation processes. 
--------------------
THE COLD WAR
Shortly after World War II, tensions arose between the United States and the Soviet Union. Historians dub this time period as the "atomic age", because of opposing nations attempting to build a bigger, better, more explosive atomic bomb than the other. Im 1949, tensions were created between the United States and the Soviet Union when the Soviets tested an atom bomb of their own. The United States announced in opposition that the United States would build an even more destructive weapon than the one dropped during World War II, the hydrogen bomb. The Soviets followed in their footsteps. What stemmed this "arms race" is the American encouragement of research and development in the nuclear power and weapons industry. 

Since times of early nuclear research, Americans had emphasized their desire to stay on top of nuclear arms research and development. They had successfully created and delivered not one, but two nuclear bombs during World War II. Americans wanted to be the biggest and scariest nuclear power and the Soviets were now jeopardizing their spot on the throne with their own development. Nuclear power was not just a means of destruction, it was also an indicator of how strong a nations economy was and how efficient their production was. The United States lead nuclear arms development, showing the Soviets and the rest of the world how economically efficient they were. Along with nuclear arms development, the United States made advances in nuclear power research and the development of nuclear power plants. This meant nothing to the United States, they felt that no matter what, any advances in Soviet development of nuclear weapons was a threat to the whole world. Once Kennedy became president in 1961, he expanded the American missile forces much further. Out of Kennedy's presidency stemmed the Cuban Missile Crisis, a time where the world was on the brink of nuclear warfare.

THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS
The Cuban Missile Crisis was a conflict stemmed in a Castro seized Cuban country. After taking power in 1959, Castro felt that it was necessary to align himself with the Soviet Union. Castro recognized that the Soviets were a major military power in the world and Cuba needed their backing. Being so close to the U.S. mainland, Cuba became a threat to national security. In 1962, a U.S. spy plane photographed a Soviet ballistic missile being assembled for installation while flying over Cuba. This was immediately reported to President Kennedy, and the president and his executive committee wrestled how to approach the issue. Kennedy and his team determined that it was unacceptable that these nuclear weapons be stationed in Cuba, only 90 miles from Florida. Kennedy ordered the United States Naval Forces to establish a blockade of the island so that the Soviets could not deliver the weapons. Kennedy went on a telivision broadcast a week after the missile was first discovered, and notified the United States' citizens on the presence of the missile and made it clear that the United States was willing to use military force and exercise their nuclear power to neutralize this threat to our national security. Americans and Soviets both feared that their countries were on the brink of nuclear war, but the symptoms of this fear were more apparent in America. Americans began to hoard food and gas, fearing that their countries economy would slow down. 

The Soviets and Americans reached a deal, in which they outlined that the United States would not invade Cuba and remove their missile installations in Turkey if the USSR removed their missiles in Cuba. From this it is apparent that United States' military presence in Western Europe spiked fear in the Soviets, and reveals their intentions to why they installed missiles in Cuba. The Soviets recognized the United States' military presence and feared it. 

Present-day nuclear tensions are still apparent between the major military nations in the world. Nations test their nuclear weapons very frequently, and current day press does a good job of expressing their advancements and letting the whole world know about their testing. However, there is no joined-up international approach to controlling nuclear arms, and the issues between countries stems from a lack of this mandating power. Russia feels that they should expand their military power because of the US moving towards modernizing and expanding their nuclear program, and other nations follow such as North Korea and Iran follow in their footsteps. Trump has expressed his concern to expand our nuclear program, with his proposal of a 17 billion dollar expenditure to expand our nuclear arsenal with low-yield, tactical nuclear weapons that could be used on conventional battlefields. This is not a good sign for the future of warfare in the world, as they make nuclear warfare more likely because of less damage coming from low-yield weapons. 

https://nationalinterest.org/sites/default/files/styles/desktop__1260_/public/main_images/Operation_Upshot-Knothole_-_Badger_001_8.jpg?itok=KwzMv7hQ

All in all, the nuclear arms race stemmed from the United States' advancements in nuclear technology during WWII, and still exists to this day. Military powers are obsessed with having the biggest and most powerful nuclear weapons in the case that a nuclear war ever erupts. Countries also want to express the strength of their military by testing their nuclear weapons and making it known to the entire world that they possess the means to take out an entire country. The nuclear arms race is an everlasting problem, there is not an international committee to regulate nuclear arms development, so countries are free to roam this field however they may please. Going forward however, to prevent a nuclear war from breaking out, an intervening committee may be useful to prevent the population of the world from being decimated. 